---
layout: post
title:  IMM API 学習
comments: true
published: false
tags:
   - 日本語入力
---

ちょっと思い至ることがあり、日本語入力のAPIを研究したいと思いました。
あちこち見まわったところ、GTK+のIMM APIが洗練されてるように見えたので、
APIの日本語化をしてみます。

## GtkIMContext

GtkIMContext — IMMコンテキスト基本クラス

## 関数

|       型|名称                                     |概要 |
|--------:|:----------------------------------------|:----|
|     void|gtk_im_context_set_client_window ()      |     |
|     void|gtk_im_context_get_preedit_string ()     |     |
| gboolean|gtk_im_context_filter_keypress ()        |     |
|     void|gtk_im_context_focus_in ()               |     |
|     void|gtk_im_context_focus_out ()              |     |
|     void|gtk_im_context_reset ()                  |     |
|     void|gtk_im_context_set_cursor_location ()    |     |
|     void|gtk_im_context_set_use_preedit ()        |     |
|     void|gtk_im_context_set_surrounding ()        |     |
| gboolean|gtk_im_context_get_surrounding ()        |     |
| gboolean|gtk_im_context_delete_surrounding ()     |     |

## プロパティ

|              型|名称          |     IO     |概要 |
|---------------:|:-------------|:----------:|:----|
|   GtkInputHints|input-hints   |Read / Write|     |
| GtkInputPurpose|input-purpose |Read / Write|     |

## シグナル

|       型|名称                  |タイミング|概要 |
|--------:|:---------------------|:--------:|:----|
|     void|commit                | Run Last |     |
| gboolean|delete-surrounding    | Run Last |     |
|     void|preedit-changed       | Run Last |     |
|     void|preedit-end           | Run Last |     |
|     void|preedit-start         | Run Last |     |
| gboolean|retrieve-surrounding  | Run Last |     |

## 構造体

|      型|名称              |概要 |
|-------:|:-----------------|:----|
| struct |GtkIMContext      |     |
| struct |GtkIMContextClass |     |
| struct |GtkIMContextInfo  |     |

## 継承関係

    GObject
    ╰── GtkIMContext
        ├── GtkIMContextSimple
        ╰── GtkIMMulticontext

## インクルード

```
#include <gtk/gtk.h>
#include <gtk/gtkimmodule.h>
```

## 解説

GtkIMContext defines the interface for GTK+ input methods. 
GtkIMContextは、GTK+ IMMのインターフェースを定義します。


An input method is used by GTK+ text input widgets like GtkEntry 
IMMは、 GtkEntryのようなGTK +テキスト入力ウィジェットによって使用され、

to map from key events to Unicode character strings.
キーイベントからUnicode文字列をマッピングします。


The default input method can be set programmatically
via the “gtk-im-module” GtkSettings property. 
デフォルトの入力方法は、 「gtk-im-module」 GtkSettingsプロパティを介してプログラムで設定できます。


Alternatively, you may set the GTK_IM_MODULE environment variable as documented in Running GTK+ Applications.
または、 GTK +アプリケーションの実行で説明されているように、GTK_IM_MODULE環境変数を設定することもできます 。


The GtkEntry “im-module” and GtkTextView “im-module” properties
may also be used to set input methods for specific widget instances.
GtkEntryの 「im-module」およびGtkTextViewの 「im-module」プロパティを使用して、
特定のウィジェットインスタンスのIMMを設定することもできます。

For instance, a certain entry widget might be expected
to contain certain characters which would be easier to input with
a certain input method.
たとえば、特定の入力ウィジェットには、
特定のIMMで入力する方が簡単な特定の文字が含まれていると予想される場合があります。


An input method may consume multiple key events in sequence and finally output the composed result.
インプットメソッドは、複数のキーイベントを順番に消費し、最終的に合成結果を出力する場合があります。

This is called preediting,
and an input method may provide feedback about this process 
by displaying the intermediate composition states as preedit text.

これは事前編集と呼ばれ、
IMMは中間編集状態を事前編集テキストとして表示することにより、
このプロセスに関するフィードバックを提供します。

For instance, 
the default GTK+ input method
implements the input of arbitrary Unicode code points
by holding down the Control and Shift keys and
then typing “U” followed by the hexadecimal digits of the code point.

たとえば、
デフォルトのGTK +IMMは、
CtrlキーとShiftキーを押しながら「U」に続けて16進数のコードポイントを入力することにより、
任意のUnicodeコードポイントの入力を実装します。

When releasing the Control and Shift keys,
preediting ends and the character is inserted as text.
Ctrl+Shift+u20AC for example results in the € sign.

CtrlキーとShiftキーを離すと、事前編集が終了し、
文字がテキストとして挿入されます。
たとえば、Ctrl + Shift + u20ACは€記号になります。


Additional input methods can be made available
for use by GTK+ widgets as loadable modules.

GTK +ウィジェットでロード可能なモジュールとして使用するために、
追加のIMMを使用可能にすることができます。

An input method module is a small shared library
which implements a subclass of GtkIMContext or GtkIMContextSimple
and exports these four functions:

IMMモジュールは、 GtkIMContextまたはGtkIMContextSimpleのサブクラスを実装し、
これらの4つの関数をエクスポートする小さな共有ライブラリです。 







void im_module_init(GTypeModule *module);

This function should register the GType of the GtkIMContext subclass which implements the input method by means of g_type_module_register_type(). Note that g_type_register_static() cannot be used as the type needs to be registered dynamically.

void im_module_exit(void);

Here goes any cleanup code your input method might require on module unload.

void im_module_list(const GtkIMContextInfo ***contexts, int *n_contexts)
{
  *contexts = info_list;
  *n_contexts = G_N_ELEMENTS (info_list);
}

This function returns the list of input methods provided by the module. The example implementation above shows a common solution and simply returns a pointer to statically defined array of GtkIMContextInfo items for each provided input method.

GtkIMContext * im_module_create(const gchar *context_id);

This function should return a pointer to a newly created instance of the GtkIMContext subclass identified by context_id . The context ID is the same as specified in the GtkIMContextInfo array returned by im_module_list().

After a new loadable input method module has been installed on the system, the configuration file gtk.immodules needs to be regenerated by gtk-query-immodules-3.0, in order for the new input method to become available to GTK+ applications.
Functions
gtk_im_context_set_client_window ()

void
gtk_im_context_set_client_window (GtkIMContext *context,
                                  GdkWindow *window);

Set the client window for the input context; this is the GdkWindow in which the input appears. This window is used in order to correctly position status windows, and may also be used for purposes internal to the input method.
Parameters

context
	

a GtkIMContext
	 

window
	

the client window. This may be NULL to indicate that the previous client window no longer exists.
	[allow-none]
gtk_im_context_get_preedit_string ()

void
gtk_im_context_get_preedit_string (GtkIMContext *context,
                                   gchar **str,
                                   PangoAttrList **attrs,
                                   gint *cursor_pos);

Retrieve the current preedit string for the input context, and a list of attributes to apply to the string. This string should be displayed inserted at the insertion point.
Parameters

context
	

a GtkIMContext
	 

str
	

location to store the retrieved string. The string retrieved must be freed with g_free().
	[out][transfer full]

attrs
	

location to store the retrieved attribute list. When you are done with this list, you must unreference it with pango_attr_list_unref().
	[out][transfer full]

cursor_pos
	

location to store position of cursor (in characters) within the preedit string.
	[out]
gtk_im_context_filter_keypress ()

gboolean
gtk_im_context_filter_keypress (GtkIMContext *context,
                                GdkEventKey *event);

Allow an input method to internally handle key press and release events. If this function returns TRUE, then no further processing should be done for this key event.
Parameters

context
	

a GtkIMContext
	 

event
	

the key event
	 
Returns

TRUE if the input method handled the key event.
gtk_im_context_focus_in ()

void
gtk_im_context_focus_in (GtkIMContext *context);

Notify the input method that the widget to which this input context corresponds has gained focus. The input method may, for example, change the displayed feedback to reflect this change.
Parameters

context
	

a GtkIMContext
	 
gtk_im_context_focus_out ()

void
gtk_im_context_focus_out (GtkIMContext *context);

Notify the input method that the widget to which this input context corresponds has lost focus. The input method may, for example, change the displayed feedback or reset the contexts state to reflect this change.
Parameters

context
	

a GtkIMContext
	 
gtk_im_context_reset ()

void
gtk_im_context_reset (GtkIMContext *context);

Notify the input method that a change such as a change in cursor position has been made. This will typically cause the input method to clear the preedit state.
Parameters

context
	

a GtkIMContext
	 
gtk_im_context_set_cursor_location ()

void
gtk_im_context_set_cursor_location (GtkIMContext *context,
                                    const GdkRectangle *area);

Notify the input method that a change in cursor position has been made. The location is relative to the client window.
Parameters

context
	

a GtkIMContext
	 

area
	

new location
	 
gtk_im_context_set_use_preedit ()

void
gtk_im_context_set_use_preedit (GtkIMContext *context,
                                gboolean use_preedit);

Sets whether the IM context should use the preedit string to display feedback. If use_preedit is FALSE (default is TRUE), then the IM context may use some other method to display feedback, such as displaying it in a child of the root window.
Parameters

context
	

a GtkIMContext
	 

use_preedit
	

whether the IM context should use the preedit string.
	 
gtk_im_context_set_surrounding ()

void
gtk_im_context_set_surrounding (GtkIMContext *context,
                                const gchar *text,
                                gint len,
                                gint cursor_index);

Sets surrounding context around the insertion point and preedit string. This function is expected to be called in response to the GtkIMContext::retrieve_surrounding signal, and will likely have no effect if called at other times.
Parameters

context
	

a GtkIMContext
	 

text
	

text surrounding the insertion point, as UTF-8. the preedit string should not be included within text .
	 

len
	

the length of text , or -1 if text is nul-terminated
	 

cursor_index
	

the byte index of the insertion cursor within text .
	 
gtk_im_context_get_surrounding ()

gboolean
gtk_im_context_get_surrounding (GtkIMContext *context,
                                gchar **text,
                                gint *cursor_index);

Retrieves context around the insertion point. Input methods typically want context in order to constrain input text based on existing text; this is important for languages such as Thai where only some sequences of characters are allowed.

This function is implemented by emitting the GtkIMContext::retrieve_surrounding signal on the input method; in response to this signal, a widget should provide as much context as is available, up to an entire paragraph, by calling gtk_im_context_set_surrounding(). Note that there is no obligation for a widget to respond to the ::retrieve_surrounding signal, so input methods must be prepared to function without context.
Parameters

context
	

a GtkIMContext
	 

text
	

location to store a UTF-8 encoded string of text holding context around the insertion point. If the function returns TRUE, then you must free the result stored in this location with g_free().
	[out][transfer full]

cursor_index
	

location to store byte index of the insertion cursor within text .
	[out]
Returns

TRUE if surrounding text was provided; in this case you must free the result stored in *text.
gtk_im_context_delete_surrounding ()

gboolean
gtk_im_context_delete_surrounding (GtkIMContext *context,
                                   gint offset,
                                   gint n_chars);

Asks the widget that the input context is attached to to delete characters around the cursor position by emitting the GtkIMContext::delete_surrounding signal. Note that offset and n_chars are in characters not in bytes which differs from the usage other places in GtkIMContext.

In order to use this function, you should first call gtk_im_context_get_surrounding() to get the current context, and call this function immediately afterwards to make sure that you know what you are deleting. You should also account for the fact that even if the signal was handled, the input context might not have deleted all the characters that were requested to be deleted.

This function is used by an input method that wants to make subsitutions in the existing text in response to new input. It is not useful for applications.
Parameters

context
	

a GtkIMContext
	 

offset
	

offset from cursor position in chars; a negative value means start before the cursor.
	 

n_chars
	

number of characters to delete.
	 
Returns

TRUE if the signal was handled.
Types and Values
struct GtkIMContext

struct GtkIMContext;

struct GtkIMContextClass

struct GtkIMContextClass {
  /* Signals */
  void     (*preedit_start)        (GtkIMContext *context);
  void     (*preedit_end)          (GtkIMContext *context);
  void     (*preedit_changed)      (GtkIMContext *context);
  void     (*commit)               (GtkIMContext *context, const gchar *str);
  gboolean (*retrieve_surrounding) (GtkIMContext *context);
  gboolean (*delete_surrounding)   (GtkIMContext *context,
				    gint          offset,
				    gint          n_chars);

  /* Virtual functions */
  void     (*set_client_window)   (GtkIMContext   *context,
				   GdkWindow      *window);
  void     (*get_preedit_string)  (GtkIMContext   *context,
				   gchar         **str,
				   PangoAttrList **attrs,
				   gint           *cursor_pos);
  gboolean (*filter_keypress)     (GtkIMContext   *context,
			           GdkEventKey    *event);
  void     (*focus_in)            (GtkIMContext   *context);
  void     (*focus_out)           (GtkIMContext   *context);
  void     (*reset)               (GtkIMContext   *context);
  void     (*set_cursor_location) (GtkIMContext   *context,
				   GdkRectangle   *area);
  void     (*set_use_preedit)     (GtkIMContext   *context,
				   gboolean        use_preedit);
  void     (*set_surrounding)     (GtkIMContext   *context,
				   const gchar    *text,
				   gint            len,
				   gint            cursor_index);
  gboolean (*get_surrounding)     (GtkIMContext   *context,
				   gchar         **text,
				   gint           *cursor_index);
};

Members

preedit_start ()
	

Default handler of the “preedit-start” signal.
	 

preedit_end ()
	

Default handler of the “preedit-end” signal.
	 

preedit_changed ()
	

Default handler of the “preedit-changed” signal.
	 

commit ()
	

Default handler of the “commit” signal.
	 

retrieve_surrounding ()
	

Default handler of the “retrieve-surrounding” signal.
	 

delete_surrounding ()
	

Default handler of the “delete-surrounding” signal.
	 

set_client_window ()
	

Called via gtk_im_context_set_client_window() when the input window where the entered text will appear changes. Override this to keep track of the current input window, for instance for the purpose of positioning a status display of your input method.
	 

get_preedit_string ()
	

Called via gtk_im_context_get_preedit_string() to retrieve the text currently being preedited for display at the cursor position. Any input method which composes complex characters or any other compositions from multiple sequential key presses should override this method to provide feedback.
	 

filter_keypress ()
	

Called via gtk_im_context_filter_keypress() on every key press or release event. Every non-trivial input method needs to override this in order to implement the mapping from key events to text. A return value of TRUE indicates to the caller that the event was consumed by the input method. In that case, the “commit” signal should be emitted upon completion of a key sequence to pass the resulting text back to the input widget. Alternatively, FALSE may be returned to indicate that the event wasn’t handled by the input method. If a builtin mapping exists for the key, it is used to produce a character.
	 

focus_in ()
	

Called via gtk_im_context_focus_in() when the input widget has gained focus. May be overridden to keep track of the current focus.
	 

focus_out ()
	

Called via gtk_im_context_focus_out() when the input widget has lost focus. May be overridden to keep track of the current focus.
	 

reset ()
	

Called via gtk_im_context_reset() to signal a change such as a change in cursor position. An input method that implements preediting should override this method to clear the preedit state on reset.
	 

set_cursor_location ()
	

Called via gtk_im_context_set_cursor_location() to inform the input method of the current cursor location relative to the client window. May be overridden to implement the display of popup windows at the cursor position.
	 

set_use_preedit ()
	

Called via gtk_im_context_set_use_preedit() to control the use of the preedit string. Override this to display feedback by some other means if turned off.
	 

set_surrounding ()
	

Called via gtk_im_context_set_surrounding() in response to signal “retrieve-surrounding” to update the input method’s idea of the context around the cursor. It is not necessary to override this method even with input methods which implement context-dependent behavior. The base implementation is sufficient for gtk_im_context_get_surrounding() to work.
	 

get_surrounding ()
	

Called via gtk_im_context_get_surrounding() to update the context around the cursor location. It is not necessary to override this method even with input methods which implement context-dependent behavior. The base implementation emits “retrieve-surrounding” and records the context received by the subsequent invocation of get_surrounding .
	 
struct GtkIMContextInfo

struct GtkIMContextInfo {
  const gchar *context_id;
  const gchar *context_name;
  const gchar *domain;
  const gchar *domain_dirname;
  const gchar *default_locales;
};

Bookkeeping information about a loadable input method.
Members

const gchar *context_id;
	

The unique identification string of the input method.
	 

const gchar *context_name;
	

The human-readable name of the input method.
	 

const gchar *domain;
	

Translation domain to be used with dgettext()
	 

const gchar *domain_dirname;
	

Name of locale directory for use with bindtextdomain()
	 

const gchar *default_locales;
	

A colon-separated list of locales where this input method should be the default. The asterisk “*” sets the default for all locales.
	 
Property Details
The “input-hints” property

  “input-hints”              GtkInputHints

Hints for the text field behaviour.

Flags: Read / Write
The “input-purpose” property

  “input-purpose”            GtkInputPurpose

Purpose of the text field.

Flags: Read / Write

Default value: GTK_INPUT_PURPOSE_FREE_FORM
Signal Details
The “commit” signal

void
user_function (GtkIMContext *context,
               gchar        *str,
               gpointer      user_data)

The ::commit signal is emitted when a complete input sequence has been entered by the user. This can be a single character immediately after a key press or the final result of preediting.
Parameters

context
	

the object on which the signal is emitted
	 

str
	

the completed character(s) entered by the user
	 

user_data
	

user data set when the signal handler was connected.
	 

Flags: Run Last
The “delete-surrounding” signal

gboolean
user_function (GtkIMContext *context,
               gint          offset,
               gint          n_chars,
               gpointer      user_data)

The ::delete-surrounding signal is emitted when the input method needs to delete all or part of the context surrounding the cursor.
Parameters

context
	

the object on which the signal is emitted
	 

offset
	

the character offset from the cursor position of the text to be deleted. A negative value indicates a position before the cursor.
	 

n_chars
	

the number of characters to be deleted
	 

user_data
	

user data set when the signal handler was connected.
	 
Returns

TRUE if the signal was handled.

Flags: Run Last
The “preedit-changed” signal

void
user_function (GtkIMContext *context,
               gpointer      user_data)

The ::preedit-changed signal is emitted whenever the preedit sequence currently being entered has changed. It is also emitted at the end of a preedit sequence, in which case gtk_im_context_get_preedit_string() returns the empty string.
Parameters

context
	

the object on which the signal is emitted
	 

user_data
	

user data set when the signal handler was connected.
	 

Flags: Run Last
The “preedit-end” signal

void
user_function (GtkIMContext *context,
               gpointer      user_data)

The ::preedit-end signal is emitted when a preediting sequence has been completed or canceled.
Parameters

context
	

the object on which the signal is emitted
	 

user_data
	

user data set when the signal handler was connected.
	 

Flags: Run Last
The “preedit-start” signal

void
user_function (GtkIMContext *context,
               gpointer      user_data)

The ::preedit-start signal is emitted when a new preediting sequence starts.
Parameters

context
	

the object on which the signal is emitted
	 

user_data
	

user data set when the signal handler was connected.
	 

Flags: Run Last
The “retrieve-surrounding” signal

gboolean
user_function (GtkIMContext *context,
               gpointer      user_data)

The ::retrieve-surrounding signal is emitted when the input method requires the context surrounding the cursor. The callback should set the input method surrounding context by calling the gtk_im_context_set_surrounding() method.
Parameters

context
	

the object on which the signal is emitted
	 

user_data
	

user data set when the signal handler was connected.
	 
Returns

TRUE if the signal was handled.

Flags: Run Last
Generated by GTK-Doc V1.30.1
 
 

    The GNOME Project
        About Us
        Get Involved
        Teams
        The GNOME Foundation
        Support GNOME
        Contact

    Resources
        Documentation
        Wiki
        Mailing Lists
        IRC Channels
        Bug Tracker
        Development Code
        Build Tool

    News
        Latest Release
        Planet GNOME
        Development News
        Twitter

    This website is available in many languages
        Switch Language

Copyright © 2005‒2014 The GNOME Project
Optimised for standards. Hosted by Red Hat.
